<h3>Introduction</h3>
With any problem we encounter as engineers, as students, as people, we instinctively look for solutions to the problem. How do we do so? Typically, we ask questions to ourselves, to our peers, and to those with more experience in the hopes of finding guidance or a solution that appropriately resolves our underlying issues. With that said, asking a smart question is especially relevant for software engineers because the whole premise of our job is to fix other people's problems and make their lives easier. From one engineer to another, asking a well-framed, smart question may turn on the lightbulbs and spark new insights, not just for ourselves, but for our peers as well.

<h3>What is a 'smart question'?</h3>
A smart question, by the definition of Eric Steven Raymond and Rick Moen, in short, is a question that is well researched, clearly stated, precise, respectful of your reader's time, and focused on real evidence and goals. To be well-researched means you have exhausted all accessible resources available to you before confronting someone. This includes reading FAQs, doing a quick Google search, looking on Reddit, asking an LLM, etc. When you have done proper research and found no answer, write a question that states what you have already tried doing, what happened when you tried the other solutions, and how your problem relates to your larger goal. A precise question may even go further, where the user provides screenshots or any concrete evidence of errors that may be helpful to the person helping. Respecting the reader's time means writing in clear language, minimizing typos, and including concise details. By asking a smart question, you make the life of others trying to help you much easier, and raises your chances of getting a quick and useful response.

<h2 <a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/11227809/why-is-processing-a-sorted-array-faster-than-processing-an-unsorted-array"></a>Example of a smart question</h2>


<h3>My Thoughts</h3>
