---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Replacing Engineers or Assisting Engineers?"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2025-12-12
published: true
labels:
  - Prompt Engineering
  - Coding Assistant
  - AI Tools
---


<!-- Begin with an introduction to the role of AI in education and its specific relevance to Software Engineering. Present an overview of the key concepts or tools related to AI that you have used generally and in ICS 314. Mention which AI tools you have made use of e.g. ChatGPT, Bard, Co-Pilot -->

<h1> Introduction </h1>

<p> Artificial Intelligence has become an increasingly prevalent tool in various fields, including education and software engineering. In the context of ICS 314, I have explored several AI tools such as ChatGPT, GitHub Copilot and Claude to assist with coding tasks, debugging, and understanding complex concepts. These tools have provided me significant assistance in my learning process and project development. However, this raises an important question: are these AI tools replacing engineers, or are they simply assisting them?
</p>

<!-- Personal Experience with AI:
Reflect on your personal experiences with AI technologies within ICS 314. Provide specific examples of how you have used AI or explanations as to why you have not used AI (e.g. “I tried it for xxx and found it did not give useful results” or “I thought it important for me to find an answer on my own.”) for each of the following course elements: -->

<h1> Personal Experience with AI </h1>
<p>Overall, I found myself using AI tools throughout the course. Below are specific examples of how I utilized AI for different course elements.</p>

<h3> Experience WODs e.g. E18 </h3>
<p>For Experience WODs, I generally tried to do them on my own. I would use ChatGPT for clarification only after I have completed the assignment or gotten completely stuck and watched the solutions video</p>

<h3>In-class Practice WODs</h3>
<p>For In-class Practice WODs, I used AI tools more frequently. I would use GitHub Copilot to help with coding tasks and ChatGPT to generate skeleton code. These tools helped me understand the material better and complete assignments more efficiently. Since it was timed, I felt more pressure to complete the tasks on time, and so I used AI tools to assist me in those moments. In retrospect, I feel like I shouldn't have relied on them so heavily so I could experience the struggle and learn from the struggle since these were merely practice WODs. For many of the earlier typescript WODs, I would ask ChatGPT to generate test cases given the code I inputted to verify that my code worked correctly.</p>

<h3> In-class WODs </h3>
<p> For In-class WODs, I typically would have practiced the practice WOD at home once or twice beforehand then would try to do the in-class WOD on my own. However, there were times where I would get stuck and use ChatGPT to help me understand how to approach the problem. Since it was timed, I would use the code generated by AI and run it to see if it worked/met the requirements. If it didn't I would try to debug it on my own first before asking AI for help. For times I couldn't figure out the issue, I would paste the code and the error and ask AI what is the error and how do I fix it.</p> 

<h3> Essays </h3>
<p> For the writing portions of essays, I generally didn't use AI tools. However, for the essay on asking smart questions, I asked AI to go through the reading and provide me ways to state how a smart question was defined by the author of the article. Sometimes I also used AI to generate images I could put into the essay.</p>

<h3> Final Project </h3>
<p> For the final project, I used Claude to help me generate code given our requirements. I would provide Claude with the requirements and ask it to generate code snippets that I could then integrate into our project. I also asked it how I can improve the UI design of some basic components I had already created. Most times I used AI generated code, I would try to go back and understand how the code worked and debugged some issues that came up from the code. </p>

<h3> Learning a Concept / Tutorials </h3>
<p> For learning new concepts or tutorials, I would often use ChatGPT to explain concepts in simpler terms or provide examples that would help me understand the material better. I found this particularly useful because AI is really stong at simplifying complex ideas and providing simple examples that are easy to understand. 
</p>

<h3> Answering a Question in Class or in Discord </h3>
<p> For answering questions in class or discord, I didn't use AI tools. I generally didn't answer many questions, but I remember answering a database one. For that one, I used my own experience to answer the question. </p>

<h3> Asking or Answering a Smart-Question </h3>
<p> For asking or answering smart questions, I didn't use AI. This is because I generally didn't ask or answer many questions. But generally, when I have questions, I don't use AI to help form a question. This is because when I ask a question, I generally have a clear idea of what I want to ask and what I want to accomplish, so I wouldn't need AI to help me form the question.</p>

<h3> Coding Example </h3>
<p> For coding examples, I typically wouldn't use AI tools. I would try to read some documentation on official websites first. If I couldn't find the answer or understand the documentation, I would then use AI tools to help me understand the concept better or provide different code examples. </p>

<h3> Explaining Code </h3>
<p> For explaining code, I generally try to parse through the code on my own. The only exception is when I'm under time pressure for a grade. In those cases, I would use ChatGPT to explain the code to me. </p>

<h3>Writing Code</h3>
<p> For writing code, I used Claude to write solutions given a set of requirements. Sometimes I would take the code generated by Claude and run it to see what outputs it produced. Then I would parse through the code line by line to understand what each part of the code did. If I found myself not understanding part of the code, I would try to read documentation on specific syntax or functions used in the code. If the generated code didn't work as expected, I would get rid of it and tackle the problem on my own.
</p>

<h3> Documenting Code </h3>
<p> For documenting code, I wouldn't use AI tools. For me, documenting code helps me understand the code better and solidify my understanding of the code. So I typically write documentation myself. </p>

<h3> Quality Assurance </h3>
<p> For quality assurance, I would generally read the errors and debug them on my own. I find that debugging code helps me understand the code better. However, if I was really stuck and couldn't figure out the issue, I would use AI tools to help me understand the error and provide possible solutions. </p>

<h1> Impact on Learning and Understanding: </h1>
<p> In ICS 314, I strongly feel that when learning new concepts, it is important to go through the struggle of problems and finding the solution on your own. This struggle is what helps remember concepts better. Since this class allowed the use of AI tools, AI has been highly beneficial to my grade and getting through assignments faster. However, I do feel that it was a bit detrimental to my learning since I didn't get to experience the struggle of solving problems on my own as much as I would have without AI tools. I also know if I didn't use the tools, I would have been at a disadvantage compared to my peers who would all be using AI. </p>

<h1> Practical Applications: </h1>
<p> From a personal point of view, I would say I use AI tools less than a lot of my peers. I personally value the learning process and the struggle of solving problems on my own. In my personal projects, I leverage AI tools to quickly understand new concepts that I can apply to my projects. Currently, I am working on a Python script that automates the process of updating my internship tracker sheet based on emails in my inbox and key word identification in email content. I used ChatGPT to help me understand the list of technologies and libraries that I would need to accomplish this task. Then I would try to watch YouTube videos and read documentation to understand the libraries and how to use them. I would then attempt to write the code on my own. If I got stuck and found no progress after some time, I would then ask AI to help me figure out a solution. I then take the time to understand it's approach and ask the AI questions regarding to it's approach. Overall, I see AI tools as assistants that help me get unstuck and understand new concepts faster, rather than replacing my role as an engineer. I hope to continue using AI tools strictly as a supplement to my own learning and problem-solving process.</p>

<h1> Challenges and Opportunities: </h1>
<p> The largest challenge I encountered when using AI within the course was for in-class WODs. Since these WODs were timed, I would try to get a working solution as fast as possible. This often led me to overly rely on AI tools to generate the code for me. The issue with this approach is that I wouldn't get to understand some of the styling the AI used in the code. This led to me not fully understanding some HTML and CSS concepts. For potential opportunities, I think it would be awesome if the ICS department could train their own AI model based on the course material and have it generate responses strictly for understanding course content and no code generation. This would help students understand concepts better without the temptation of having AI generate code for them. </p>

<h1> Comparative Analysis: </h1>
<p> Compared to AI-enhanced teaching, I believe that traditional teaching is much more beneficial for students to actually learn the material. In my opinion, traditional teaching beats AI-enhanced teaching in engagement, knowledge retention, and practical skill development. While it is easy to say "Let AI assist in your learning", I believe that students (including myself) can sometimes fall overly reliant on AI tools to get through assignments faster. This reliance leads to a lack of engagement with material and taking time to understand the material, which ultimately leads to poor knowledge retention and practical skill development. When answers come easy to us, we tend to not remember or care about the method taken to get the answer. Traditional teaching forces students to engage with the material and struggle through problems, which ultimately leads to better understanding and retention of knowledge. </p>

<h1> Future Considerations: </h1>
<p> I believe that AI shouldn't replace the fundamental learning process, and shouldn't have a place in education at all given the current state of AI. Currently, AI tools spoon-feed students answers without encouraging critical thinking or understanding. As for areas of improvement, I find it very difficult to see how AI tools won't be taken advantage of by students in order to get through assignments and get a good grade. A potential work around would be to somehow restructure courses to make AI not useful, but that presents its own challenges and may not even be possible with how intelligent LLMs have become. For students, I feel that it is more discipline than anything. Having the discipline to not use AI tools despite them being so accessable and valuing personal learning and development over grades, which I am personally trying to work towards currently. </p>

<h1> Conclusion: </h1>
<p> Overall, AI tools have been a double-edged sword in my learning experience in ICS 314. While they have provided significant assistance in completing assignments faster, they have also detracted from my learning experience. While using AI has become a growing trend in the world and learning to use AI tools is an important skill, I believe that a line needs to be drawn between using AI as an assistant and using AI as a replacement for personal learning and problem-solving. I personally haven't defined a fine line to using AI for strictly efficiency and learning versus using AI to replace critical thinking and development as an engineer, but I generally try to limit my AI usage overall. Moving forward, I hope to find a good balance that allows AI to increase productivity but not let AI overshadow the fundamental learning process. </p>